
[INFO] Chunk 0:


[INFO] Chunk 0, text:

2021/22SUSTAINABILITY  
ANNUAL REPORT

 Page Number: 1 

Environmental Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22  2INTRODUCTION
The University’s mission is to make a positive impact locally,  
nationally and globally by addressing society’s greatest challenges.  
As a university we support citizens and future citizens through research, 
education, engagement and management relating to sustainability.  
Our work in this space spans every area of the University, with key teams 
including the Cabot Institute, Bristol Futures, Procurement, Bristol SU, 
Bristol Student Hub, External Estates, Public Engagement, Library  
Services and, Sustainability, based in the Campus Division.
This report focuses on the operational and environmental elements  
of the University’s Sustainability Strategy. 
We have used the UN Sustainable Development Goals throughout this report to track our progress with 
reference to these global goals.  
 
Please visit www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/ sustainable-development-goals/ for more information.
CONTENTS
Sustainability at a glance 4
Emissions, Discharges and  
Environmental Management System   5
Procurement 5
Circular Economy 6
Travel and Transport 7
Energy, Carbon and Water Managment   8
Sustainable Science 10
Education for Sustainable Development 12
The Living Estate, Biodiversity  
and the Natural Environment 13
Staff and Student Engagement  
and Behaviour Change 14
Ethical and Sustainable Food 15

 Page Number: 2 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22  3FOREWORD
Alongside developing and  
maintaining infrastructure and 
services, the Department also focuses 
on behaviour change to support the 
rollout and uptake of its initiatives.
Of course, the biggest focus across  
the Department is our target to reduce 
our scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions  
to net-zero by 2030. In essence this  
means we will reduce our emissions 
to as low as possible, offsetting a 
maximum of 5%. The Department is 
also working on agreeing ambitious 
timescales for achieving net zero  
carbon for Scope 3 emissions, which 
include the carbon associated with 
travel to and from campus, as well  
as other indirect sources, in particular  
the products and services we buy.
The aim of our annual report is to  
be transparent about our performance  
in relation to key objectives set out  in our sustainability operations  
sub-strategies. These include 
biodiversity, carbon, transport,  
the circular economy and food.  
It’s only by monitoring our  
performance in relation to our  
targets that we can ensure  
we are always striving to improve.”“The Sustainability Team is responsible for the overall sustainability of  
operations across campus, ranging from transport to energy and delivers this  
by ‘Making a sustainable university, by managing our precious resources,  
maintaining our sustainable standards and minding our impact on our communities’.  
Martin Wiles,  
Head of Sustainability


 Page Number: 3 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22  4
SUSTAINABILITY AT A GLANCE
<1
%
goes to landfill
University Fairtrade 46CO
%2
37%water consumption‡
wasteof%reused, 
recycled, 
composted, 
anaerobically 
digested55re-certificationISO14001£0.5m      saved
by Sustainable Science and Green Labs
37 
million km‡‡Business travel
allocated to electric vehicles£235,000 
150
tonnesCO 2 saved
from system
upgrades15 
tonnes
 furniture reused35
40
Schools
and 
Depts
Bristol Big Give 
£14,000generated up to
for local charities865,532
passengersThe U1 and U2 carried
175%
since 2020/21an increase of
*  2005/06 baseline year from which our net zero  
for scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions target is based** from baseline  
year 2005/06‡  from baseline  
year 2007/08‡‡  Compared with  
57m km in 2018/19**
have started their 
Climate Action Plans

 Page Number: 4 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 5
The University successfully passed  
an audit for ISO 14001:2015 in  
2022. The University’s system examines  
the University’s output and not just  
its operation.
Sustainability continues to maintain  
an annually reviewed environmental 
legislation register, available on our 
website, which covers all emissions 
and discharges, providing assurance 
for pollution prevention and compliance 
with legislation.The new ISO 14001:2015 standard 
provides the University with the 
opportunity to include additional 
sustainability criteria in the EMS over 
and above environmental 
considerations. 
This provides a framework for other 
strategic themes including Circular 
Economy, Sustainable Procurement,  
and Ethical and Sustainable Food.EMISSIONS, DISCHARGES  
AND ENVIRONMENTAL  
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The University’s Responsible  
Procurement Plan 2019-23 sets 
strategic objectives for sustainable 
procurement, social value and  
ethical sourcing.
The policy and subsequent processes 
that followed work towards embedding 
into all tenders a balanced consideration 
of social, ethical, environmental and 
economic impacts as well as value for 
money, evaluating the whole-life costs 
of major goods, services and works. 
Scope 3 Emissions Reporting  
During 2021/22, the University made  
good on a long-held ambition to 
participate in national reporting of Scope 
3 emissions (i.e. those from our suppliers).  
Continued participation will improve our 
understanding of this area, as well as 
working closely with our trusted suppliers. 
Replacement of high  
Scope 1&2 equipment  
One of our key priorities continues to be 
supporting the purchase of less carbon-
intensive equipment. This is difficult to 
achieve without considerable resources  in energy efficiency and alternative energy 
consumption (e.g. replacing gas boilers with 
heat-pumps). The Procurement Team is 
working with Sustainability colleagues to 
facilitate a relatively small number of initial 
changes (e.g. known changes in pilot 
buildings), to review and influence current 
investment and maintenance programmers, 
and to scope the further changes required.
Local supply
Our aim is to increase the University’s 
spend on products from suppliers based 
within the West of England city-region 
from £28m to £40m by 2030. 
The University works with other higher 
education institutions and public bodies 
in the local region to maximise the ability 
of local suppliers to tender successfully 
and to delivery social, environmental and 
economic benefits in the South West. 
Brexit, Covid and the war in Ukraine has led 
to increases in costs and rigidities in supply 
chains. This has made it more difficult to 
meet University requirements, and has 
made the introduction of environmental 
and social contributions more challenging.Sustainable procurement best practice is key to our circular  
economy targets and supports the University’s progress  
towards our targets in waste prevention and reduction. PROCUREMENT
The University’s 
ISO14001 
accreditation is 
reviewed annually. 

 Page Number: 5 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 6
The University of Bristol has adopted a Circular Economy approach to managing its 
resources. This offers potential cost savings as well as sustainability improvements  
and redefines how our institution manages its resources, away from a linear model  
of ‘make, purchase, consume and dispose’.
Bristol Big Give  
We continue to work with our partners across the City  
on our annual student reuse campaign, Bristol Big Give. 
This year, the students in our halls of residents have 
donated around 8 tonnes of quality goods that 
generated around £14,000 for British Heart Foundation 
(BHF). The city-wide campaign, in partnership with UWE, 
saved in excess of 120 tonnes of textiles and reusable 
items and generated an income for the charity of over 
£200,000. BHF’s new flagship vintage clothing shop 
open on Park Street in August 2022 and is primarily 
stocked with items collected from student donations 
throughout the year’s campaign.
CIRCULAR ECONOMY
Sustainable consumption,  
waste prevention and reduction   
Sustainable consumption best practice  
is key to our circular economy targets, 
as well as waste prevention and 
reduction. ‘Whole-life cost’ models  
were developed in 2018-2019 and our 
key focus is working with teams across 
the University to embed sustainability 
into the tendering process to ensure 
waste costs are considered in the 
process, along with other broader 
sustainability criteria. 
In April 2022 we introduced our new 
Furniture, Fixings and Equipment Policy 
and tendered for a supplier that meets 
our sustainability needs, with the aim  
of repairing and repurposing existing 
furniture before buying new. 
We are also working with our supply  
chain on developing interventions, such 
the introduction of reusable hazardous 
and clinical waste containment,  
which we will pilot on selected sites 
throughout the 2022/23 academic year.Reuse, recycle, compost  
and anaerobic digestion    
In 2021/22 we continued to recover  
from the Covid 19 pandemic. As the 
restrictions began to be lifted across  
the UK as well as the implementation  
of blended working, the amounts  
and types of waste generated were 
changing compared to previous years. 
The University has a goal to reuse 10% 
and recycle 65% of total ‘at source’ 
waste produced by 2026. This year we 
achieved a combined reuse, recycling 
and composting (through anaerobic 
digestion and windrow composting)  
rate of 55%. This is an increase from 
previous years and was mostly driven  
by the increase in the food waste 
separated for anaerobic digestion 
through our catering operations. 
An additional 2% of our waste stream  
was reused through our in-house 
furniture reuse platform ReStore, food 
donations and working with charities 
such as Bristol Wood Recycling Project and Better World Books. ReStore alone 
enabled a redistribution of 15 tonnes  
of furniture across our campus and 
provided a saving of almost £100,000 
for the University.
Incineration, energy  
from Waste and landfill  
In 2021/22 the University sent only 0.3% 
of its waste to landfill, recovering energy 
from waste (EFW) wherever possible.  
We continually review the destination  
and disposal routes we use with our 
contractors and, this year, decreased  
the quantity of waste incinerated without 
energy recovered from 5.3% in 2020/21 
to 4.1% in 2021/22. 
 
 0.3%
waste to landfill

 Page Number: 6 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 7
Transport is essential to delivering the University’s mission yet responsible for some of its 
most significant negative impacts on the environment. Managing these impacts is a key 
focus for the Sustainability Team through its Travel and Transport Delivery Plan.  TRAVEL AND TRANSPORT
The Plan aims to reduce transport-
related emissions by applying the 
sustainable transport hierarchy, in 
summary:  
•    reduce demand for travel and 
transport and reliance on motorised 
modes through smart working 
practices and campus development; 
•    make sustainable travel (such as cycling, 
walking, public transport and car-
sharing) the first choice for all essential 
commuting and business journeys; 
•    improve the efficiency of operational 
and supply chain transport by 
reducing journeys and shifting  
to zero-emission technologies.
Among the key activities undertaken  
by the team on a day-to-day basis to 
achieve these aims are:  
•    managing and developing the contract 
for Bristol Unibus, a high-quality bus 
network linking University campuses  
at Clifton, Stoke Bishop and Langford; 
•    enhancing trip-end facilities for staff and 
student cyclists (secure cycle parking, 
showers etc) across the University estate; •    managing and developing  
University parking policy in a way 
that balances essential vehicle 
access across the estate with  
the environmental impacts of  
private car use; 
•    working with Capital Development 
colleagues to ensure that all new 
campus developments meet the 
highest industry standards for 
sustainable transport provision; 
•    offering advice, practical support  
and incentives to staff and students  
to encourage use of sustainable 
travel all types of journeys (e.g. 
Cycle to Work scheme, discounted 
bus tickets; 
•    modernising University fleet transport 
operations through investment  
in electric vehicles and e-cargo  
bikes and introduction of a fleet 
management system; and  
•    supporting faculties and professional 
services divisions to measure and 
manage their wider transport 
footprint, e.g. from air travel, through 
the Climate Action Plan process. Student travel  
We set a target for 96% of daily student 
journeys to study to be made by walking, 
cycling and public transport modes of 
transport by 2022. According to the 
University’s student travel survey (March 
2020), 86% of university students normally 
commute on foot, by bike or public 
transport while 6% travelled by car. The 
Covid pandemic has again had an impact 
on how students travel to study, resulting in 
a greater percentage now travelling by car. 
Staff travel   
We set a target for 85% of daily staff 
journeys to work to be made by walking, 
cycling and public transport modes of 
transport by 2022. According to the 
Travelwest Travel to Work Survey (March 
2022), more than two-thirds of university 
staff (68%) normally commute on foot,  
by bike or public transport while 27% 
travelled by car. The average comparable 
mode shares for all Bristol organisations 
included in the survey were 57% and 
35% respectively. The Covid pandemic 
has had a substantial impact on how 
staff commute to work, resulting in a 
greater percentage now travelling by car. Fleet transport  
The University operates a fleet of more 
than 100 road vehicles, managed by 
schools and departments to support 
research, teaching and campus 
operations. In 2021/22, more 80% of this 
fleet was diesel or petrol-powered and  
of these vehicles nearly a third were 10 
or more years old. With investment from  
the University and grant funding from  
the Energy Saving Trust, our Cleaner 
Fleet Programme has begun the process 
of modernising the vehicle fleet, with 
around 30 new electric vans and a fleet 
of 10 e-cargo bikes due to come into 
operation in 2022/23.  
Further investment and policy change 
will be required in the next 2-3 years  
to reach our targets. Members of staff 
from Sport, Exercise 
and Health being 
trained in the use of 
the Division’s new 
electric cargo bikes 
as part of the Cleaner 
Fleet Programme.

 Page Number: 7 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 8
Our carbon reduction activities fall 
under the following 8 key areas: 
1. Using space better
2.  Not using energy where  
we don’t have to
3.  Using energy as efficiently  
as possible
4.  Designing new buildings to  
be energy efficient, and to  
accept low carbon sources  
of heat and power
5.  Using renewable energy  
on site
6.  Making use of renewable  
energy from local sources,  
such asbiomass and district  
heat
7.  Using low carbon electricity  
from elsewhere in the UK,  
such as offshore wind
8. Offsetting the remainderIncreasing the efficiency  
of our asset base   
Improving the efficiency and decarbonising 
energy use in buildings is key to reaching 
our net-zero target. A number of things 
must be considered including asset status, 
use and age, as well as whether the 
demands on the asset are the same as 
they were at the time of build. In 2021/22 a 
pilot project of works at Dorothy Hodgkin 
Building, totaling £650k, enabled us to 
upgrade its energy management system 
and completely refit lighting with state-of-
the-art LED lighting with occupancy 
controls in individual rooms, saving a 
combined total of 150tCO2. We are now 
rolling out a similar project of works at 
the Life Sciences and Biomed Buildings.
Building energy controls   
Our newly upgraded Building Energy 
Management Systems enable us to 
reprogram our control systems to identify 
and eliminate energy waste, for example, 
making sure that a building is not being 
cooled when it is also being heated. 
Implementing these controls at our Arts 
and Social Science Library has reduced gas use by enough to heat 25 homes a 
year, and we are making great strides at 
Life Sciences, Dorothy Hodgkin Building 
and the Richmond Building too. There are 
many opportunities to make saving like 
this as our campuses become smarter.
The table (right) outlines out scope  
1 & 2 carbon emissions from our 
buildings in tonnes: 
Overall, Scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions 
from our buildings are down by 46% 
from baseline year 2005/06.The target of our Climate Emergency Declaration is to become net-zero in our  
Scope 1 & 2 emissions from our buildings by 2030. Our Carbon and Water Strategy  
looks at how we will lower emissions across scope 1, 2 & 3. ENERGY, CARBON AND WATER MANAGMENT 
A project to upgrade the energy management 
system and completely refit lighting with state 
of the art LED lighting is currently underway  
at the Life Sciences Building.
2005/6
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30CO2 emissions
 46,701
 31,389
 27,514
 27,253
 25,008CO2 Target
 
 25,000
 22,000
 19,000
 16,000
 13,000
 10,000
 7,000
 4,000
 1,000

 Page Number: 8 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 9
Renewable energy   
We currently have 400kW of solar power 
available across Hiatt Baker, National 
Composite Centre and Langford, as well 
as several smaller sites. We are reviewing 
opportunities to use more solar power 
and heat pumps, however there are 


[INFO] Chunk 0, model answer:

{
  "Education": "Yes",
  "Knowledge Production": "Yes",
  "Public Debate": "No",
  "Service Delivery": "Yes",
  "Campus Operations": "Yes",
  "Criticism": "No",
  "Self-Evaluation": "Yes"
}

[INFO] Chunk 0, json output:

{
    "modalities": {
        "education": true, 
        "knowledge_production": true, 
        "services": true, 
        "public_debate": false, 
        "campus_operations": true
    },
    "criticism": {
        "present": false
    }
}

[INFO] Chunk 1:


[INFO] Chunk 1, text:

 at 
Life Sciences, Dorothy Hodgkin Building 
and the Richmond Building too. There are 
many opportunities to make saving like 
this as our campuses become smarter.
The table (right) outlines out scope  
1 & 2 carbon emissions from our 
buildings in tonnes: 
Overall, Scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions 
from our buildings are down by 46% 
from baseline year 2005/06.The target of our Climate Emergency Declaration is to become net-zero in our  
Scope 1 & 2 emissions from our buildings by 2030. Our Carbon and Water Strategy  
looks at how we will lower emissions across scope 1, 2 & 3. ENERGY, CARBON AND WATER MANAGMENT 
A project to upgrade the energy management 
system and completely refit lighting with state 
of the art LED lighting is currently underway  
at the Life Sciences Building.
2005/6
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30CO2 emissions
 46,701
 31,389
 27,514
 27,253
 25,008CO2 Target
 
 25,000
 22,000
 19,000
 16,000
 13,000
 10,000
 7,000
 4,000
 1,000

 Page Number: 8 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 9
Renewable energy   
We currently have 400kW of solar power 
available across Hiatt Baker, National 
Composite Centre and Langford, as well 
as several smaller sites. We are reviewing 
opportunities to use more solar power 
and heat pumps, however there are 
some problems with this – not least that 
everyone has the same idea, and the 
electricity grid is undergoing momentous 
change to accommodate more and more 
individuals and organisations become 
energy producers rather than consumers. 
Furthermore, calculations show that even 
if it were financially viable to implement 
solar panels across all suitable buildings, 
this would only generate 5% of our 
energy requirements, so the challenge  
to move towards generating our own 
renewable energy is complex. 
We are also looking at ways to recycle 
heat that might otherwise have been 
wasted, particularly from computer 
servers – promising sites have been 
identified in 2021/22 and will be further 
investigated in 2022/23.Contracts   
By working with other Universities,  
we can reduce financial risks from 
escalating energy prices and encourage 
new renewable energy installations.  
We currently buy 20% of our electricity 
directly from windfarms using contracts 
called Power Purchase Agreements and 
opportunities to increase this are being 
investigated. The recent price volatility 
in the electricity markets and changes to 
material prices and interest rates have 
introduced uncertainty, but we hope to 
make an announcement in 2023.
We are also investigating how to  
work with and encourage Bristol’s own 
district heat network, as a local source  
of lower carbon heat – progress on  
the City’s new joint venture is expected  
in January 2023.  
 
Certifications   
We measure our  
carbon to an 
international standard 
called ISO 14064, so that we can 
transparently demonstrate that the carbon reductions we make are  
real. In 2021/22, Achilles renewed  
our certification, confirming that  
the organisation is actively  
working to measure and manage  
its carbon footprint.
Water  
Water consumption is back to  
a pre-pandemic level, however 
consumption is still down by  
37% in comparison to the  
baseline year of 2007/08. ENERGY, CARBON AND WATER MANAGMENT
37%water consumption

 Page Number: 9 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 10
In order to reduce our scope 1 & 2 
carbon emissions to net zero by 
2030 we are prioritising improvements 
to our STEM buildings in terms of 
infrastructure, equipment, and controls. 
The equipment, consumables and 
chemicals we purchase and consume 
though our scientific activities account 
for the majority of our scope 3 emissions 
across the University. By considering 
life cycle costs and purchasing efficient 
equipment we can significantly reduce 
our environmental impact whilst 
improving research. Considering how 
we operate our labs also helps us 
achieve vast energy and carbon savings 
and we engage with our scientific 
community, through schemes such as 
Green Lab Certification, to achieve this. 
We aim to reduce the energy 
consumption within our STEM 
buildings by 40-50% in line with  
our Carbon Net Zero plans by 2030. 100% Green Lab Certification  
The University of Bristol was the first 
to achieve 100% Bronze Green Lab 
Certification in 2021. The team set a 
new target of 100% Silver Certification 
by 2024 and Gold Certification 
by 2030. Hundreds of STEM staff 
are involved, and the initiative is 
mainly driven by technicians, with 
increased engagement from the 
academic community required as work 
progresses towards the 2024 target.  
Embedding circularly 
economy principles  
We aim to embed circular economy 
principles within our scientific 
operations and activities. This 
includes purchasing in a sustainable 
manner and increasing our reuse and 
recycling rates by implementing a lab 
plastic recycling scheme, switching 
to glassware in our fly food labs, 
centralising stores and purchasing, 
and reusing general lab consumables 
alongside life cycle carbon analysis.STEM laboratories at the University of Bristol account for 40% of our energy and waste 
budget as well as 32% of our annual water bill, but only occupy 6% of our space. SUSTAINABLE SCIENCE 
STEM Climate Action Plans (CAP)
The target is for 100% of STEM schools 
to have written their CAP towards 2030 
carbon neutrality. This involves the 
baselining of School carbon footprints 
(including scope 3 emissions) with 
internal and central annual reporting. 
At present, 50% of STEM Schools 
have written their CAP and we are 
on target for 100% coverage by 
the end of the calendar year 2022. 
We have analysed carbon data 
within different spend and emission 
categories on the departmental level.
‘Green Labs’ ensures that our cutting-edge 
research can continue to thrive, whilst 
minimising environmental impacts.

 Page Number: 10 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 11
The ecological and climate emergency 
will disrupt society, whether because 
of the changes we must make or because 
of the negative impacts of climate change. 
Enabling students to explore global 
challenges alongside students from other 
disciplines and through extracurricular 
activities and education supports the 
development of tomorrow’s global 
citizens, improves employability and 
respond to a growing demand from 
students to discover ways that can have  
a positive impact on the world. 
The challenge the University faces with 
regard to sustainability in education is to 
find ways of integrating this into our 
educational offerings and quality 
processes, recognising that different 
subjects will need different approaches 
and be able to move at different speeds.
The University’s approach to Education 
for Sustainable Development (ESD) aims 
to engage students with the concepts of 
sustainability and sustainable development, both through 
interdisciplinary challenge-focused units 
and discipline specific content. In all 
cases, this will link to the themes of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), 
though different disciplines will prioritise 
different themes, depending on what is 
appropriate.
Education for Sustainable 
Development Staff Network 
Launched in 2021, our new ESD 
Network brings together staff to share 
information and understanding around 
this growing area. The Network hosted a 
plenary event, and several small working 
groups focused on experience-sharing 
regarding new sustainability-themed 
master’s degrees. The aim is to continue 
to build a bottom-up community of staff 
to share expertise and best practice. 
Bristol Futures Units 
Bristol Futures enables learners to study 
global challenges and fulfil their academic 
and personal potential. Designed for our students and keen external learners, 
Bristol Futures provides an opportunity  
to tackle the key challenges in Global 
Citizenship, Sustainable Futures and 
Innovation and Enterprise. 
In 2021/22 the Sustainable Development 
unit provided 300 students with an 
interdisciplinary, activity-based 
experience of sustainability challenges 
and potential ways forward. Sustainability 
is also incorporated into other Bristol 
Futures unit content as appropriate.
Sustainable Futures Online Course 
The four-week Sustainable Futures 
course, available through FutureLearn, 
ran three times throughout 2021/22 
academic year, providing both University 
of Bristol students and learners from 
elsewhere the opportunity to explore 
sustainability and ways in which they 
can contribute. It has now been taken 
by over 14,500 learners around the 
world, including several thousand 
University of Bristol students. The new ISO 14001:2015 standard provides the University with the opportunity to include 
additional sustainability criteria in the EMS over and above environmental considerations and 
the University has included Education for Sustainable Development within this management 
system since 2012/13. This made Bristol one of the first universities within the Russell Group 
and one of only a handful in the sector to do this. EDUCATION  
Through teaching and learning our students  
will be enabled to have a positive sustainability 
impact on the world outside of the University.

 Page Number: 11 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 121.  Identify and record 
Wessex Ecological Consultants once 
again carried out key species monitoring 
during 2022. This results in species  
lists and numbers which contributes  
to understanding species population  
(see 3. Monitor) and informs 
adjustments needed to maintenance 
plans. 
The Botanic Gardens has been 
undertaking a project to add country  
of origin names to plant labels as  
part of a University ethnobotany  
and global engagement program. 
2. Evaluate 
External Estates employs qualified 
ecologists including an assessor for 
Building with Nature and a ‘Suitably 
Qualified Ecologist’ for BREEAM. 
Fenswood Farm has been working  
with Students Organising for 
Sustainability (SOS-UK) and several 
other university farms to research 
‘Farming for Carbon’ as part of an  
initial five-year program.   3. Monitor
All sites are monitored for key  
habitats, key species, relationships  
to external sites which helps to identify 
opportunities to engage and form 
partnerships with local industry  
and action groups (part of civic 
engagement). Recent interactions 
include Bristol’s Green Squares and 
Secret Gardens and Birdcage Walk. 
4. Conserve
The Botanic Gardens displays native 
species of local and national importance 
and continue to develop and maintain unique plant collections of national  
and international importance. For 
example, it maintains a living gene  
bank of threatened species from the 
South West of England.   
5. Enhance
Simone Jacobs (Horticultural Supervisor 
in Gardens and Grounds) worked with 
students to achieve Gold, Silver and 
Bronze awards for Hedgehog Friendly 
Campus Campaign 2021/22. Fenswood 
Farm has contributed to a community 
led initiative for the production of a 
bespoke local wildflower seed which  
will have a positive impact for  
Long Ashton. 
6. Inform
External Estates continues to work in 
partnership with schools and faculties  
to use our natural environment. In 2022 
Gardens and Grounds released an app 
which can be used to identify trees 
within the University campus. It contains 
over 4900 individual specimens and 
interesting facts about key species.
We proactively manage land and resources to benefit wildlife and conserve biodiversity.  
We do this by implementing Habitat Action Plans, minimising chemical use, and conducting 
regular monitoring surveys. The University of Bristol’s Biodiversity strategy comprises of 
six steps which we report against:THE LIVING ESTATE, BIODIVERSITY  
AND THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
The University of Bristol’s Royal Fort Gardens 
has been awarded the coveted Green Flag 
Award as it is officially recognised as one  
of the country’s best parks.


 Page Number: 12 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 13
The impact of COVID-19 has been  
to reduce the face to face engage 
with staff and students, but many events 
and activities happened during 2020/21  
both virtually as well as in person.  
Here are some of the key activities
Developing and implementing  
Climate Action Plans across  
every school and department
A Climate Action Plan (CAP) sets out  
the specific carbon reduction activities 
that will be implemented to reduce Scope 
1 and 2 emissions. The Sustainability 
Team developed a Climate Action 
Planning Tool in 2019, but the initial launch 
was hindered by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This year, the Team continued to 
support departments to create, sign- 
off and implement their plans through  
a programme of engagement and 
education around the themes included  
in the tool with departmental CAP 
co-ordinators. The target is for 100% of 
schools and departments to have started 
to implement their CAP by the end of 2022/23 academic year. In 2021/22,  
35 of our 40 schools and departments  
(87%) had either started writing or  
begun implementing their plans.
Green Rewards app  
Our points-based behaviour change 
scheme continued to run for both staff  
and students in two three-month segments 
in 2021/22. The programme encouraged 
participants to complete actions related to 
their own sustainability and wellbeing on  
a weekly basis, awarding them points for 
each action. Prizes were given out to those 
who took part and achieved the highest 
scores. The staff scheme involved over 
1,000 members of staff who logged over 
3,000 actions. The student scheme 
involved over 500 students, resulting  
in over 1,000 actions logged. 
Fair Trade   
As part of our effort to uphold Fairtrade 
accreditation gained in early 2021,  
the University developed a Fair Trade 
steering group engaging with the Fair 
Trade Network. Each year the University supports Fairtrade fortnight and through 
February to March 2022 this involved 
various Fairtrade themed competitions 
with the Source Café, a Fairtrade film 
screening at Senate House Loft and a 
number of Fairtrade food pop-up stalls 
across campus. 
Green Mob 
To support various sustainability related 
initiatives and campaigns across 
campus, the Sustainability Team 
recruited and managed a team of c.25 
student volunteers. The volunteer group 
was set briefs, including promoting a 
survey around student perceptions of Our communication plan includes numerous campaigns  
and initiatives to engage and collaborate with a diverse  
mix of staff and students across the University, in addition  
to engagement with the wider sector. STAFF AND STUDENT ENGAGEMENT  
AND BEHAVIOUR CHANGE 
the University’s response to the climate 
emergency, as well as capturing and 
editing footage and photos of the  
SU’s Climate Day of Action event. 
IEMA Corporate partnership  
In the Summer of 2021, the University 
became an IEMA (Institute of 
Environmental Management and 
Assessment) Corporate Partner. This 
partnership programme aims to develop 
staff and student skills in environment 
and sustainability, by offering training 
and networking opportunities, ultimately 
helping the University address the 
significant sustainability challenges it 
faces. This partnership will be developed 
in 2021/22 for staff and student benefit.
Social Media
The virtual welcome fair occurred 
on 7 October 2020. On the day, 606 
students visited the Sustainability booth. 
It is difficult to know the impact of this, 
but it was felt that it was good to have  
a presence at this key event.
 
Sustainability Newsletter  
The Department writes and distributes  
a monthly newsletter to staff, student  
and public subscribers. In 2021/22 the 
newsletter had 450 active subscribers, 
with an average open rate of 40%.   Sustainability student 
interns managed a 
food swap initiative 
as part of Food  
Waste Action Week. 

 Page Number: 13 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 14
Some of the changes we have seen 
over the last 24 months have 
brought the catering strategy to life  
and the team has seen a marked 
improvement to the student experience 
and our sustainability credentials 
through the publication of a new 
Sustainable Food Action Plan in 2021. 
This plan aims to deliver key objectives 
under six areas for a holistic approach 
to sustainable food.  
 
Some of our key targets for 2021/22 and 
our progress against these are detailed 
below:  
1.  We will deliver ‘eat in’ retail units 
with zero single-use packaging  
for fresh food offerings from 2022  
 
Our Senate House eat-in retail unit has 
zero single use-packaging for fresh 
food, which we expanded to all 
Source Grab & Go outlets, achieving a 
substantial step towards achieving zero waste through identifying and working 
with suppliers who could support the 
objective to move to full plastic free 
packaging. In 2021/22, 90% of all 
products sold were plastic free.  
2.  All ruminant meat offerings  
will be reduced from 2021   
 
A revamped menu across the catered 
halls has seen a reduction in ruminant 
meat dishes from 16% of the menu 
down to 6% of the menu. All ruminant 
meat has been removed from the  
Retail/Café ‘Grab & Go Range’.
3.  Vegan and Vegetarian food will be 
increased by 10%  by 2022  
 
With the revamped menu in the 
catered halls Vegan and Vegetarian 
food has increased from 45% of  
the menu up to 66% of the menu.  
A 21% increase has been achieved 
(11% above target). 4.  Map carbon related to all  
food and drink offerings and  
reduce it by 20%  by 2023   
 
Source ran a trial at one of the  
catered halls that mapped the carbon 
footprint of the main course dishes. 
This resulted in investing in an app 
called ‘Klimato’ that will allow us to 
accurately produce carbon data for all 
items produced ‘In-house’, enabling 
us to change

[INFO] Chunk 1, model answer:

{
  "Education": {
    "present": true,
    "evidence": [
      "Enabling students to explore global challenges alongside students from other disciplines and through extracurricular activities and education supports the development of tomorrow’s global citizens, improves employability and respond to a growing demand from students to discover ways that can have a positive impact on the world.",
      "The University’s approach to Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) aims to engage students with the concepts of sustainability and sustainable development, both through interdisciplinary challenge-focused units and discipline specific content.",
      "Education for Sustainable Development Staff Network Launched in 2021, our new ESD Network brings together staff to share information and understanding around this growing area."
    ]
  },
  "Knowledge Production": {
    "present": true,
    "evidence": [
      "Fenswood Farm has been working with Students Organising for Sustainability (SOS-UK) and several other university farms to research ‘Farming for Carbon’ as part of an initial five-year program.",
      "The University of Bristol’s Biodiversity strategy comprises of six steps which we report against."
    ]
  },
  "Public Debate": {
    "present": false,
    "evidence": []
  },
  "Service Delivery": {
    "present": true,
    "evidence": [
      "We currently buy 20% of our electricity directly from windfarms using contracts called Power Purchase Agreements and opportunities to increase this are being investigated.",
      "We are also investigating how to work with and encourage Bristol’s own district heat network, as a local source of lower carbon heat – progress on the City’s new joint venture is expected in January 2023."
    ]
  },
  "Campus Operations": {
    "present": true,
    "evidence": [
      "Overall, Scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions from our buildings are down by 46% from baseline year 2005/06.",
      "Water consumption is back to a pre-pandemic level, however consumption is still down by 37% in comparison to the baseline year of 2007/08.",
      "In order to reduce our scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions to net zero by 2030 we are prioritising improvements to our STEM buildings in terms of infrastructure, equipment, and controls."
    ]
  },
  "criticism": {
    "present": false,
    "evidence": []
  },
  "self-evaluation": {
    "present": true,
    "evidence": [
      "Overall, Scope 1 & 2 carbon emissions from our buildings are down by 46% from baseline year 2005/06.",
      "Water consumption is back to a pre-pandemic level, however consumption is still down by 37% in comparison to the baseline year of 2007/08.",
      "In 2021/22, 35 of our 40 schools and departments (87%) had either started writing or begun implementing their plans."
    ]
  }
}

[INFO] Chunk 1, json output:

{
    "modalities": {
        "education": true, 
        "knowledge_production": true, 
        "services": true, 
        "public_debate": false, 
        "campus_operations": true
    },
    "criticism": {
        "present": false
    }
}

[INFO] Chunk 2:


[INFO] Chunk 2, text:

 for a holistic approach 
to sustainable food.  
 
Some of our key targets for 2021/22 and 
our progress against these are detailed 
below:  
1.  We will deliver ‘eat in’ retail units 
with zero single-use packaging  
for fresh food offerings from 2022  
 
Our Senate House eat-in retail unit has 
zero single use-packaging for fresh 
food, which we expanded to all 
Source Grab & Go outlets, achieving a 
substantial step towards achieving zero waste through identifying and working 
with suppliers who could support the 
objective to move to full plastic free 
packaging. In 2021/22, 90% of all 
products sold were plastic free.  
2.  All ruminant meat offerings  
will be reduced from 2021   
 
A revamped menu across the catered 
halls has seen a reduction in ruminant 
meat dishes from 16% of the menu 
down to 6% of the menu. All ruminant 
meat has been removed from the  
Retail/Café ‘Grab & Go Range’.
3.  Vegan and Vegetarian food will be 
increased by 10%  by 2022  
 
With the revamped menu in the 
catered halls Vegan and Vegetarian 
food has increased from 45% of  
the menu up to 66% of the menu.  
A 21% increase has been achieved 
(11% above target). 4.  Map carbon related to all  
food and drink offerings and  
reduce it by 20%  by 2023   
 
Source ran a trial at one of the  
catered halls that mapped the carbon 
footprint of the main course dishes. 
This resulted in investing in an app 
called ‘Klimato’ that will allow us to 
accurately produce carbon data for all 
items produced ‘In-house’, enabling 
us to change the way we work and 
record further reductions on our 
carbon emissions by the target date.
5.  Reduce the sugar in our  
foods by 10% by 2022   
 
By reducing the portion size of all 
Source desserts and substituting 
honey for sugar we have reduced  
the sugar by around 15% (5%  
above target). 
 
Continued on next pageIn 2020, an innovative Catering strategy proposed a new direction for the Catering 
department, supporting the University’s Strategic Vision and Campus Division goals  
by enhancing the student and staff experience; offering greater choice and variety;  
adapting to the changing trends in food consumption and incorporating a global offer; 
operating as a ‘cost neutral’ operation; and adopting sustainable values.ETHICAL AND SUSTAINABLE FOOD
Sustainability is incorporated into all aspects  
of the University’s food and drink services.

 Page Number: 14 

Sustainability Annual Report 2021/22 15
Removed the sale of all  
drinks in plastic bottles 
•   Bottled water no longer sold  
at the University
•  Removed plastic straws
•   Launched a convenience shop  
with a range of zero waste product
•   Removed plastic pints of milk and 
implemented a milk dispenser  
system with a deposit scheme  
for glass bottles 
•   Sell at cost price sustainably sourced 
reusable hot drink cups and stainless-
steel BPA free reusable water bottles. Promote the environmental and  
health benefits of plant-based  
foods supported by staff and  
student campaigns  
    
•   Adapted menus to reflect the 
emerging meat-free trend, which has 
decreased our food costs and helped 
increase our sustainability credentials.
•   Increased the number of vegetarian or 
vegan dishes from one, to two options 
per day, increasing our plant-based 
offering to 66% of our menu. 
•   Increased the vegetable component 
of traditional meat-based dishes  
e.g. lentils in lasagne.Reduce food waste  
  
•  Introduced the ‘Too Good to Go’ app 
in January 2021, giving the University 
an opportunity to not only reduce the 
food waste from our cafes, bars and 
halls of residences, but a way to reach 
to the local community beyond the 
student population
•   Started to weigh and record all  
the kitchen waste into the three  
main areas of food waste; kitchen 
preparation, counter and plate  
waste and kitchen spoilage. 
•   Increased our buying of lesser used 
foods, like chicken thighs in place  
of breasts, and wonky vegetables, 
which reduces waste outside of  
our direct businessETHICAL AND SUSTAINABLE FOOD
In addition to this year’s achievements, Source continues to demonstrate  
sustainability across its operations with the following actions:


 Page Number: 15 

www.bristol.ac.uk/sustainability 
/UoBSustainability
/UoBrisSust
/uobsustainability

 Page Number: 16 



[INFO] Chunk 2, model answer:

{
  "Task 1": {
    "Education": {
      "Present": "No",
      "Details": "The text does not mention any activities related to teaching, learning, or curriculum development."
    },
    "Knowledge Production": {
      "Present": "No",
      "Details": "The text does not mention any activities related to research, scholarship, or innovation."
    },
    "Public Debate": {
      "Present": "No",
      "Details": "The text does not mention any activities related to public engagement, dissemination of ideas, or political involvement."
    },
    "Service Delivery": {
      "Present": "Yes",
      "Details": "The text mentions several services delivered to the community, such as the reduction of single-use packaging, reduction of ruminant meat offerings, increase of vegan and vegetarian food, reduction of sugar in foods, and efforts to reduce food waste."
    },
    "Campus Operations": {
      "Present": "Yes",
      "Details": "The text mentions several activities related to the management of the university's resources and operations, such as the removal of plastic bottles, implementation of a milk dispenser system, promotion of plant-based foods, and reduction of food waste."
    }
  },
  "Task 2": {
    "Self Evaluation": {
      "Present": "Yes",
      "Details": "The text contains several self-evaluative statements, such as 'Our Senate House eat-in retail unit has zero single use-packaging for fresh food, which we expanded to all Source Grab & Go outlets, achieving a substantial step towards achieving zero waste' and 'A 21% increase has been achieved (11% above target)'.",
      "Negative": "No",
      "Details": "The text does not contain any negative self-evaluative statements. All the self-evaluations are positive, indicating that the targets have been met or exceeded."
    },
    "Criticism": {
      "Present": "No",
      "Details": "The text does not contain any criticism or negative comments about the university's sustainability efforts."
    }
  },
  "Table": {
    "Education": "No",
    "Knowledge Production": "No",
    "Public Debate": "No",
    "Service Delivery": "Yes",
    "Campus Operations": "Yes",
    "Criticism": "No",
    "Self Evaluation": "Yes"
  }
}

[INFO] Chunk 2, json output:

{
    "modalities": {
        "education": false, 
        "knowledge_production": false, 
        "services": true, 
        "public_debate": false, 
        "campus_operations": true
    },
    "criticism": {
        "present": false
    }
}
